Blog: How we 80'20ed the data warehouse (#8695)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/8020-the-data-warehouse.md

---
title: "How we 80/20'ed the data warehouse"
date: 2024-06-13
author: 
 - james-greenhill
 - ian-vanagas
featuredImage: https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/warehog_f318a079bf.png
featuredImageType: full
tags:
  - Engineering
  - Product engineers
---

If David Attenborough did documentaries about tech products, he would definitely do one about the mythical data warehouse. Because he doesn't, I'll take you on that adventure myself.

We recently released our [own data warehouse](/docs/data-warehouse), but what does that mean? When other companies are building on top of, inside, and around data warehouses, why did we need to build our own and what's special about it?  

This post dives into the strategic and technical details of why and how we built our version of the data warehouse.

## PostHog vs the modern data stack

> The data warehouse space is a crowded one. They are the crown jewel of the [modern data stack](/blog/modern-data-stack-sucks), but we have a problem with this whole setup. The modern data stack is too complicated, requires too much maintenance, and creates a gap between engineers and the data they value.
> 
> To improve this situation, PostHog aims to be the [source of truth for customer and product data](/handbook/why-does-posthog-exist#be-the-source-of-truth-for-customer-and-product-data). We also aim to be one of the first tools a startup installs. If we add more of the functionality startups and small teams need from the modern data stack, we can remove or delay their need for it.
> 
> A big need is the flexibility a data warehouse provides. It enables them to query many types of data. The product data PostHog focuses on is one piece of that. We faced this challenge ourselves. We often need to query Stripe, Zendesk, and Hubspot data. A lot of it doesn't fit nicely into our event-based pattern, which is where building a data warehouse comes in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data warehouse space is a crowded one. It's the crown jewel of the cursed [modern data stack](/blog/modern-data-stack-sucks) ecosystem, a concept so amorphous it's spawned an entire industry of consultants whose job is to define, sell and maintain the illusion it's working.

But (spoiler warning) we think the modern data stack kinda sucks for most companies. It's excessively complicated, hard to maintain, and widens the gap between engineers and the data they value. It doesn't add value, it extracts.

Our solution is to build more of the functionality startups and small teams need from the modern data stack, so we can remove or delay their need for it. We started by building a world-class analytics platform; the data warehouse is the next piece of that puzzle.

With it, our users can query many types of data from sources like Stripe, Zendesk and Hubspot – data that doesn't nicely fit into our existing event-based pattern. And they can do so without faffing about with middleware to get their data where they need it to be. 

In doing so, we can:

1. Be the source of truth for all product and customer data.
2. Be a default tool that every startup needs from the beginning.
```

Feel free to totally junk this. I was kind of going for something with more rhetorical heft, but maybe it's OTT? I like some of it, but it's a wordier.

Reviewer: Bit of an aside, but I worry our language around warehouse being for startups and small teams could end up cementing the view we're "not for enterprise". Not super important here, but something for use to think about generally.

### Receiving department (AKA get data into PostHog)

First, we need to schedule workflows to sync data from sources. What better tool to do this with than our good pal Temporal? We already used [Temporal in batch exports](/blog/temporal-exports) and elsewhere, so it made sense as a base.

Temporal triggers a job that uses [dlthub](https://dlthub.com/) to create a pipeline to the source. `dlt` handles requests to the source, pagination, and data transformation. Basically, it makes it easy to connect to sources and get useful data out of them. 

The data we pull from sources is serialized as Parquet and stored in S3. We also record the schema of the underlying Parquet data in our metadata store, which gets used in query building.  

Overall, this is a flexible format that enables us to build connectors easily. It also enables users to [define their own blob storage tables](/docs/data-warehouse/setup#step-1-creating-a-bucket-in-s3) to query with PostHog. 

![Receiving workflow](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/deliver_2fcea400ef.png)

### Dispatch department (AKA query data from the warehouse)

> You might be saying "cool bro, anyone can upload a table to S3," but it doesn't stop there for us. We have two more tricks up our sleeves when it comes to actually using and querying the data.

Reviewer 2: lol

> To do querying, we rely on [HogQL](/docs/hogql), our home-built query engine. It transpiles to SQL but modifies and injects commands and functions into the query to simplify the user experience and optimize queries. For example, it injects [null handling](/blog/null-handling-hogql), uses [materialized columns](/blog/clickhouse-materialized-columns), and modifies the query based on the source schema. This largely relies on [ANTLR](https://github.com/antlr/antlr4).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do querying, we rely on [HogQL](/docs/hogql), our home-built query engine. It transpiles to SQL, but modifies and injects commands and functions into the query to simplify the user experience and optimize queries. For example, it injects [null handling](/blog/null-handling-hogql), uses [materialized columns](/blog/clickhouse-materialized-columns), and modifies the query based on the source schema. This largely relies on [ANTLR](https://github.com/antlr/antlr4).
```

> For example, a user writes a query like `select email, address from test_stripe_customer where email like '%posthog.com'` in an SQL insight. This then gets modified and transformed to:

Reviewer 2: NIT: the sentence 2 sentences before also started with "for example."

> For example, a user writes a query like `select email, address from test_stripe_customer where email like '%posthog.com'` in an SQL insight. This then gets modified and transformed to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, when a user writes a query like `select email, address from test_stripe_customer where email like '%posthog.com'` in an SQL insight, it gets modified and transformed to:
```

![SQL transpiled](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/sql_441d06db52.png)

> Where does that query run? In our best friend [ClickHouse](/handbook/engineering/clickhouse) (sorry Temporal). ClickHouse powers PostHog. It is the main database we use to store and query event data (among other things). Nicely for us, ClickHouse provides an [S3 table function](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/sql-reference/table-functions/s3). This means we can query data using all our existing query logic without needing to create a table for it or load it first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where does that query run? In our best friend, [ClickHouse](/handbook/engineering/clickhouse) (sorry Temporal). ClickHouse powers PostHog. It is the main database we use to store and query event data (among other things). Helpfully for us, ClickHouse provides an [S3 table function](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/sql-reference/table-functions/s3). This means we can query data using all our existing query logic without needing to create a table for it, or load it first.
```

![Dispatch workflow](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/dispatch_538046323f.png)

## Becoming the Django of data stacks

> The data warehouse is part of our aim to be like the Django of data stacks. This means we are more opinionated with less flexibility but easier to get value out of quickly and maintain. We want engineers to self-serve and make use of their data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data warehouse is part of our aim to be like the Django of data stacks. This means we're more opinionated with less flexibility, but easier to get value out of quickly and maintain. We want engineers to self-serve and make use of their data. 
```
